Luxury timber pods connect to create a house that brings the outside in
Is it OK to have a Christmas party at Hooters? How can I tell my co-workers their Halloween costumes are racist? I accidentally hugged the CEO. How embarrassed should I be?
These are the kinds of questions that often land in Allison Green’s mailbox. Green is the manager behind the popular Ask a Manager blog, which she launched almost 10 years ago while working at a not-for-profit organization in Washington DC and now attracts 2 million visitors a month.
It all happened on a whim, she says. Frustrated with seeing people “both in the hiring process but also internally within the office” make bad choices, Green decided to start a blog.
“The common denominator with all of this stuff is that you don’t understand how your manager or your interviewer is thinking. I thought there is a place to give insight into how managers and how job interviewers think. And really on a whim – my boyfriend had gone out and I was bored – I put together the Ask a Manager blog,” she says. “I didn’t think anybody would read it. I had no idea how I would go about getting an audience. I figured I would do it for maybe three to six months and get it out of my system and then I would be done and move on with my life.”
Yet people did find it. Of the 2 million visitors she gets a month, about half have never visited the site before. “I am not clear on how that happened,” she laughs. “I didn’t do any SEO [search engine optimization] or any of that stuff you are supposed to do to build an audience. I think I got really lucky with the timing. Somehow people found it and started sending in questions.”
Green now receives 50 to 60 questions a day, answering just a fraction. The thing that sets her blog apart, she says, is the ability to answer a question about specific situations with several twists.
“If someone doesn’t read the column, they might think: ‘Work advice? That sounds really boring.’ But when you read it, it’s not really just work advice. It’s interpersonal advice. It’s advice about your own personal issues that are causing problems for you, maybe in your career. That’s so much more interesting than talking about how to make your résumé,” she explains. “There is real hunger out there for a place that people can go to ask really nuanced questions.”
“What she had done for me is really drill in my head that you have to confront the reality of your situation, not what you wish your situation were,” she says.
When selecting letters from readers to answer, Green often looks for awkwardness. “There is a really uncomfortable thing going on and everyone feels awkward about it and the only way you are going to get it to stop is if you are willing to suck it up and say something that no one wants to because it’s a horrible conversation to have,” says Green.
One of her favorite letters was from someone who worked at an office where the receptionist kept hugging everyone who came to the office. “And not just a quick hug, like a full body-hug where she would hold on for like a full minute. People were really uncomfortable and no one knew what to say to her and they were worried their appointments didn’t want to come to their office any more,” she says. Her advice: talk to the receptionist. Have the awkward conversation and move on.
“Some of the drama is very soap opera-ish. I have a real taste for the weird and so if I get a crazy letter, it goes straight to the top of my list. I love the crazy letters. I always wonder: ‘Am I pushing the balance too far in that direction?’ But people really like it. It makes it so much more interesting. I have people say to me all the time that reading the column makes them appreciate their own workplace and their own boss.”
Much has changed in the job market since 2007 – the unemployment rate went up, then down. Co-working spaces became trendy and the threat of robots taking over our jobs became slightly more real. Yet at the core of it, people still worry about the same stuff, says Green.
“The most common stuff is: ‘I have a terrible boss, what do I do? I want my co-worker to stop doing this annoying thing but I don’t want to say anything to them about it, is there a magic pill?’ Those haven’t changed and probably will never change. There is stuff that changed around the edges. A year after I started we plunged into a recession, and that had a huge impact on the job market, and so the nature of the questions that I was getting for a few years was upsetting and stressful, really. There were people who had been out of work for years,” she says.
“I am still talking to millennials who can’t get job in their field because when they graduated, they graduated into a terrible recession and they have been working at Starbucks for several years and now no one will hire them for the job they got a degree in. I have also seen things getting better post-recession. People are also more willing to leave bad situations than they were in the middle years that I was writing.”
There have been other changes too. There are more questions about telecommuting and perks that disappeared during the recession and haven’t yet made it back. There are also a lot more questions about animal-friendly offices and how to navigate them.
“The most interesting was probably from someone who went to work in an office that was dog-friendly and a bunch of people brought their dogs in and she had really debilitating allergies. The company did not want to work with her on it and legally they had to accommodate her. But people were pissed. People felt like they had come to the company specifically because it was dog friendly and she was ruining it. It became a very hostile environment for her,” Green explains. “She ultimately had to leave over it because there was such a huge clash of her interest against their interests. You can kind of see where they are coming from too – it’s their culture.”
For Green, who at 43 has spent most of her life working at and with not-for-profit groups, doling out advice in a friendly conversational manner – (“It’s sort of like answering an email from a friend,” she says) – feels like working for a cause, “doing good in the world”.
“I think as long as it continues to feel like that, I’ll keep doing that,” she says.
Luxury timber pods connect to create a house that brings the outside in
The Co-op is recalling chocolate Santas after batteries were found inside two of them.
The retailer said there were two “alleged tampering incidents” involving the hollow milk chocolate figures, which sell for £1.
It has informed the police and Food Standards Agency and started a national product recall.
There was no indication of any blackmail demand or threat, a spokesman said.
The Co-op has sold 165,000 of the German-made Santas, which are available from other retailers, and has advised people not to eat them.
The Santas with batteries were found in two separate locations, some distance apart.
A Co-op spokesman said: “The health and safety of our customers is our top priority. We are concerned about two separate instances of alleged product tampering involving our hollow milk chocolate Santa foil figures, which have been found to contain a small battery inside.
“As a result we have begun a UK-wide product recall. The police and Food Standards Agency are being notified. Customers with one of these products should not eat it but call our customer relations team for a full refund.”
Anyone who is concerned should call 0800 0686 727 for free. The Co-op said no other products were affected.
 The trees came first – five ancient oaks amid which this trinity of pods in Beaminster, Dorset, has arisen in homage. When it rains the stainless steel gutters water said trees. Less fortunate oaks were sacrificed to construct the cladding, floors and the decked areas that wrap round each pod and extend the main rooms into the garden when the glass doors are open. The impression is of three humble holiday cabins floating just above the gravel on this hilltop. Look closer and they’re connected by glass and wood walkways. Photographs by Humberts
Three long-serving primary school cleaners, who went on strike over claims their wages and conditions were cut when a private company took over the contract, have been sacked days before Christmas.
The women – Lesley Leake, Marice Hall and Karen McGee – sparked a debate over outsourcing when they went on strike for 14 weeks after their school in West Yorkshire was turned into an academy earlier this year.
Known as the “Kinsley cleaners”, the women said they had their wages cut from £7.85 an hour to the minimum wage of £7.20 once the contract switched from Wakefield council to C&D Cleaning in April.
The women, who between them have more than 28 years’ experience cleaning Kinsley primary school, returned to work earlier this month. But on Thursday they were told they had been sacked.
Jeremy Corbyn said he was angered by the news of the cleaners’ dismissal. “When I met them, they explained how their wages were cut following the outsourcing of their contracts to a private company,” the Labour leader said.
“Outsourcing is bad for our public services and workers. The cleaners’ jobs must be brought back in-house with fair pay and conditions. The race to the bottom in wages and working conditions faced by huge numbers of workers right across Britain is a national disgrace and Labour would put a stop to it.”
Dave Prentis, the Unison general secretary, said the women had bravely taken action to protect their wages and employment rights. “To then sack them just days before Christmas is heartless in the extreme,” he said, adding that the union would be consulting lawyers over the decision to dismiss them.
Speaking to the Guardian in October, Leake – who has two adult children and a second job – said her pension, sick pay and holiday entitlement had also been hit by the outsourcing. “The first month [under C&D Cleaning] when we got our payslips we just thought it could be a few teething problems, but the second month it was the same, and it just went on and on,” she said.
The women said they had tried to raise the issues with C&D Cleaning but were “fobbed off”. In the end the three got in touch with their union, Unison, but C&D Cleaning, based in nearby Barnsley, was reluctant to discuss the women’s cases.
In one email seen by the Guardian, the company’s head of human resources, Nick Thorpe, replied to Unison: “I understand … the impact for you as an organisation when members realise that we are no longer living in the 1980s and they question the actual value of union membership when you have no say, power or influence over their employer.”
The three women decided to go on strike, staging their first picket outside the school at the beginning of September. “It was a bit scary at first because none of us have ever done anything like this, but we didn’t know what else we could do,” said Leake. “It wasn’t just the money we were losing, it was the stress that was affecting us and our families as well.”
A statement from C&D Cleaning read: “The employees were invited to a disciplinary hearing on an earlier date in December to respond to allegations of gross misconduct. At the employees’ request, the hearing took place on 19 December 2016 as their chosen Unison representative was not available on the earlier date.
“Full details of the allegations were provided to the employees in advance of the hearing. The employees and their representative were given full opportunity to put their cases. The outcome of the hearing was termination of employment. The individuals have been informed of their right of appeal. The company will not comment further at this stage so as not prejudice any internal process.”
Jon Trickett, the local MP, said all the “three courageous women” had done was stand up for their right to work. “With only days until Christmas, it looks like Scrooge has been brought back to life from Victorian times and ruined the festive period for three families in my constituency,” he said.
He said the women’s experiences were unfortunately common. “Our country needs better pay, better conditions and better corporate governance to make sure that all employees are treated fairly,” he said. “It is also time that we stopped outsourcing services paid for by the taxpayer to rogue employers.”
Barter has been going on for thousands of years, but as Mark Williams, managing director of trading platform Bartercard UK puts it, “gone are the days when you swapped a sheep for a goat”.
New technology, Williams explains, means the potential of barter is expanding fast: it’s no longer about one business swapping its products on an ad hoc basis: instead a company may barter across a diverse range of sectors, including internationally – and receive substantial value back in return.
If you’re an office furniture business, for example, and have some stock left over, it can be hard to find a taker for the last few chairs and desks. As members of a barter scheme, such as Bartercard, the furniture business will sell the chairs at the retail price for “trade pounds”, which have the same value as sterling. It then gets to spend the pounds it has earned on other items within the membership group. This might be restaurant meals, accountancy advice, tickets for the races or nights in a fancy hotel.
In this way, barter has the potential to free up a company’s cashflow, even out the peaks and troughs of demand and squeeze more value out of goods or services that wouldn’t otherwise be sold.
“We’re not there to take away any of the current cash business, but to sit alongside it,” Williams says.
It’s a sector that is growing quickly. Bartercard’s UK franchise, the business started in Australia 25 years ago and now operates globally, has more than 2,000 members and hopes to reach 20,000 within five years.
According to the US-based International Reciprocal Trade Association’s president and CEO Ron Whitney, the UK’s organised barter sector is one of the fastest growing in the world. “The only limitation to barter industry growth is lack of awareness of the benefits in the business community,” he says. “However, barter awareness is definitely on an upswing.”
If a business has any degree of unused capacity, in the form of time or inventory “you should use a barter strategy to maximise your business’s sales capacity,” says Whitney. “Additionally, barter exchanges provide a built-in new market for startup companies to sell to and buy from. Participation in a barter exchange can provide an important jumpstart for new businesses.”
In York, Hedley House hotel owner Greg Harrand says barter has taken some of the anxiety out of the seasonal hospitality business.
“If I don’t sell a night tonight, that’s gone; I can’t sell that night again,” he says. Hedley House is full every weekend and on race days and bank holidays, but if there’s spare capacity mid-week, which Harrand knows is likely at certain times of year, it’s far better for him to earn trade pounds than see no value from those rooms at all.
Harrand has used his trade pounds to pay a local carpet cleaner, to buy bacon and sausages from a local butcher who’s a fellow Bartercard member, and even to reward staff who’ve done a good job. “One of my managers is a Manchester United fan, and I gave him £1,500 of football tickets, which you actually wouldn’t have been able to buy in the cash world, but were available to Bartercard members,” he says. “That meant a lot to him [and] the actual cost to me was around £150 [because of the cost price of the unsold rooms he traded on the platform].”
Rob Marsden, who owns multi-sensory branding firm IOH Branding, says he’s traded around £1.5m worth of goods in the 17 years he’s been a Bartercard member. He’s also found a whole new group of customers through the scheme.
“They guarantee that they will get you leads, and so it’s business we wouldn’t have found elsewhere,” Marsden says. “People say ‘we’d rather have cash’ ... but most businesses have some surplus, and using this system you always sell at retail to maintain the margins.”
In theory, businesses can barter virtually anything: tattoos, physiotherapy, boats and even houses have been traded via the barter system. It’s also seen as a credible way of doing business by governments and multinationals. An example from the 90s saw Pepsi sign a $3bn deal with the Soviet Union, bartering its soft-drink syrup for vodka and freight ships.
Ideally, where small and medium-sized businesses are involved, you need a critical mass of members in a geographical area. “If you go town by town, building up to 250 members, it really starts to work,” says Williams.
However, while swapping a goat for a sheep doesn’t involve anything more than a handshake, at this rather more sophisticated level, there there are costs – though not necessarily always cash – involved. Astus UK, for example, helps companies secure media space by negotiating access to, and then bartering, goods and services needed by large broadcasters. It operates at a very large scale and opts not to charge businesses to take part. Instead it invests in certain suppliers, and rather than requiring a monetary dividend return, asks for “capacity” which is then used in exchanges that are part-barter and part-cash.
“A broadcaster might give us a million pounds worth of airtime, and get back a million pounds worth of outdoor [advertising] space,” says David Jones, managing director of Astus. “It gives a significant cashflow benefit.”
In contrast, Bartercard members pay a monthly fee in both cash and trade pounds, plus a percentage on every sale. It also extends a line of interest-free credit, that increases with each level of membership.
While cash will always be king, using up spare stock or capacity offers businesses a helpful way to keep their balance in the black, and comes into its own when there’s a capital expenditure in the offing or ongoing costs that have to be stumped up. “Last month we moved offices,” says Marsden, “and I got all our furniture and carpet on trade pounds. It would have cost £20,000 in cash.”
He believes that having the option to barter has made his company healthier, reduced overheads and resulted in new cash business. “We always look at Bartercard options before buying elsewhere,” he says. “We can’t always do it, but we always look there first.”
Sign up to become a member of the Guardian Small Business Network here for more advice, insight and best practice direct to your inbox.
Amazon’s Go concept store is the perfect example of digital technology doing what it does best: getting out the way. The checkout-free shop uses proximity sensors, cameras and an app to make the in-store experience so seamless that you can literally pick items off the shelf, walk out with them, and have them automatically billed to your account.
This simple focus on making the user experience as smooth as possible is a sharp contrast to how many marketing teams have tried to maximise in-store technology. Conversations around proximity sensors or beacons typically focus on actively getting consumers to go out of their way to fulfil a brand’s desires, or interrupting them as they use their phone.
It’s a marketing dream that a consumer in the crisp aisle could receive a notification on their phone directing them to a new drink three aisles away that would go perfectly with their prawn cocktail crisps, and perhaps even offer them a trial coupon to entice them. Once there, why not notify them of a personalised buy-one-get-one-free offer on a chocolate bar their loyalty card data tells us they used to love, but haven’t picked up in a while?
You can see the attraction to marketers who can cash in on the phone in your pocket and use it, and all sorts of data, to their advantage. The trouble, of course, comes when you start thinking of the consumer experience you’re creating. For most people, grocery shopping is at best an enjoyable errand, at worse a traumatic experience dragging around kicking and screaming kids. Their mission on entering a store is to find everything they want and get out as quickly as possible.
No doubt there’s a certain type of person who’d happily bounce across a supermarket if it got them the best deals, but for most people the prospect of turning shopping into a complex treasure hunt is far from appealing. Similarly, just because you’re checking your Facebook newsfeed in the checkout queue doesn’t mean you’ll want to abandon your place and head back into the melee when an interesting offer pops up.
Digital marketing efforts and platforms need to start by bringing genuine utility to people. That’s why the satellite navigation app Waze has gone from strength to strength, offering a route-finding service, into which occasionally an advert is shown.
Ad-first services still haven’t properly taken off – if consumers aren’t using an app to their advantage in their daily lives they’re unlikely to want to install it just to interact with your advert. If marketers want to divert shoppers around different parts of a supermarket and past their products, they need to find a genuinely useful way of doing so. Perhaps the answer is an app that can take your shopping list, map out where every item is in the shop, and guide you round it like an indoor satnav? It still feels a little over-engineered, but perhaps some people would find a use for it and be open to having special offers flagged along the journey.
Truthfully, there’s an even bigger lesson to learn: that for the most part we need to stop asking people to do anything at all. It’s usually hard enough just to make shoppers aware of your product and to stay front of mind when it comes time to buying it, let alone wanting to force them through hoops along the way.
Stop asking what we can get consumers to do with digital technology (and subsequently which needy messaging and desperate incentives we’ll need to try to force them to do it) and start thinking about how digital technology can seamlessly get out of their way. Even a platform such as Facebook, which seemingly offers an easy way to drive this “engagement”, abandoned its focus on this years ago, pointing marketers instead to how it could get their messages in front of billions of largely passive users. It’s painful that much of the industry is still chasing these vanity metrics or trying to force people away from what they want to do, which is to swipe on to the next story in their feed.
It’s definitely a challenge for traditional marketing that consumers are turning to mobile and digital screens, and it’s disrupting all industries. The mobile phone, for instance, is now arguably the main competitor for chewing gum and chocolate sales at the checkout as we choose to stare at it rather than be led into other temptations. Yet advertisers need to stay routed in very clear laws of marketing and not get led astray by the temptation to try new things for the sake of them. You’ll need a lot of people to know your product exists, and to think about it when and where it’s available, for it to fly off the shelves. It’s a classic challenge that needs a solid creative and media response, and it’s a lot more rewarding than trying to chase a shopper round a virtual supermarket maze or get them to take your Facebook quiz.
To get weekly news analysis, job alerts and event notifications direct to your inbox, sign up free for Media & Tech Network membership.
All Guardian Media & Tech Network content is editorially independent except for pieces labelled “Brought to you by” – find out more here.
When I decided to fund a TV commercial on Christmas Day, I didn’t realise it would lead to the start of a campaign to ask large businesses to change their approach to charitable giving and support small charities.
Here’s how that came about.
After I was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukaemia, which left me in need of a gruelling stem cell transplant, I spent the best part of 2014 in hospital. While there I benefitted from the amazing work that charities do, so when I left hospital I wanted to give something back.
I not only wanted to give the gift of funding but of awareness. I settled on a Christmas Day TV advert to highlight the work of a specific charity, as well as advertising on product packs. But when I approached some of the UK’s leading charities, I was shocked to be made to feel as if I had to prove myself and my brand to earn their approbation. Sadly I was too small for them, and they were too big to care.
The experience made me look beyond these big, well-known charities to the smaller ones doing extraordinary work on a shoestring. They are overlooked when it comes to big corporate giving but their work is just as important, if not more so. I vowed then and there to do something to help.
I have written and directed a two-minute TV commercial (with no mention of the products I sell) and have secured a prime time spot on Channel 4 on Christmas Day, timed to air just after the Queen’s Christmas broadcast. This is the advert I wantto use to shine a light on these small-time heroes.
I approached a small, Tetbury-based national charity called Hope For Tomorrow, which works tirelessly to provide mobile chemotherapy units to local NHS Trusts so patients don’t have to travel for hours for treatment. The charity leapt at the chance to work with me because such opportunities to raise awareness of their work don’t come their way often, and I was thrilled to be involved with such a great cause.
But I was shocked by the huge gap between big and small organisations in the charity sector. The larger charities get the lion’s share of corporate giving, leaving the smaller ones scrabbling for scraps.
This is a flaw in the charity sector, and much of the problem comes from an unbalanced relationship with business. Large organisations mainly work with large charities that already have a global level of awareness. It’s almost as though businesses are glory hunting when it comes to charity partnerships, to the detriment of smaller charities.
I have launched a campaign calling for large corporations to support small charities and shout about the ones they are already supporting. So whatever your cause, please sign my pledge and help to make a change this Christmas.
I have also dedicated a page on my Black Farmer website to help businesses and small charities find each other. As businesses, it’s important to show that we care for bigger things than just the products we sell.
Talk to us on Twitter via @Gdnvoluntary and join our community for your free Guardian Voluntary Sector monthly newsletter, with analysis and opinion sent direct to you on the first Thursday of the month.
When I moved in July I gave gas and electricity readings to npower. The electricity reading was significantly less than npower’s previous estimate, while the gas reading was higher.
However, the final electricity bill used the estimate, which was higher than the supplied reading, while the gas bill went with the meter reading, which was higher than the estimate.
This statement showed I was in credit by £37.99. I advised npower that I was due a bigger refund because it had overestimated my electricity. In response I received a bill for £270. It then admitted it had made a mistake… and instead issued a bill for £265.64. On all three bills the amount charged for the same electricity usage was different. In October a fourth bill arrived for £157.81. In vain did I repeat that it was npower which owed me money.
I’ve spent days on the phone but have got nowhere. SL, Malpas, Cheshire
Npower attempts the excuse that your meter has been changed, which it hasn’t, and then claims your meter was incorrectly identified in 2012.
Now it says the meter details hadn’t been updated – that is to say it apparently hadn’t got round to recording your final electricity reading, although it managed to with the higher than predicted gas one. It has refunded you the overpayments plus a goodwill gesture.
A London square whose wealthy residents have included Margaret Thatcher and Sean Connery has been crowned the most expensive in England and Wales with an average house price of nearly £17m.
Eaton Square, in the upmarket Belgravia district of west London, topped a list dominated by addresses in the capital, according to an annual survey by Lloyds Bank.
But the lender’s research also found that every region in England and Wales now has at least one “million-pound street”.
Built by the Grosvenor family in the 19th century, Eaton Square features grand homes and apartments featuring Grade II-listed white stucco facades.
