There is a powerful new club in the north-west of England but its most bankable players are probably unfamiliar, despite raking in hundreds of millions of pounds a year from fans.
Meet Boohoo, PrettyLittleThing and Missguided, the Manchester-based online companies threatening to take over fashion retailing with inexpensive, brash clothes that are more likely to have been inspired by a reality TV star’s clubbing outfit than the catwalk.
Last week, Boohoo bought a controlling stake in PrettyLittleThing, the startup founded by the sons of Boohoo’s co-founder, Mahmud Kamani. With PrettyLittleThing valued at only £5m thanks to an option clause dating back to Boohoo’s flotation prospectus in 2014, the deal was as much of a bargain for shareholders as the £8 clingy dresses its shoppers love.
“The deal provides Boohoo with a complementary brand at a really attractive valuation,” says Phil Adams, chief executive of GCA Altium, who advised Boohoo. The purchase gives Boohoo shareholders – who have seen the value of their holdings quadruple this year – a slice of one of the fastest-growing young fashion brands in the UK at the moment.
The driving force behind PrettyLittleThing is 28-year-old Umar Kamani, who started the brand with his brothers in 2012. Sales surged 400% to £17m in the 12 months to end of February 2016 as its target market of teenagers and twentysomethings snapped up edgy fashions created with so-called “influencers” like Lionel Richie’s 18-year-old model daughter, Sofia. Sales are expected to ratchet up by another 150% this year.
Online fashion aimed at young women is currently the sweet spot in a tough fashion market, because low prices keep wardrobe updates within reach of even the tightest budgets.
“The teenage wallet has its limitations,” explains Boohoo’s joint chief executive, Carol Kane. “We don’t have a high returns rate: our shoppers don’t want to tie up their money. If they are spending £20 on a dress they won’t spend £40 ordering two sizes. They don’t have that kind of money. It is quite different to the middle market.”
Kane adds that key to PrettyLittleThing’s success is the age of the founders: “Umar is from the same generation as his customers.” That means he knows his peers are glued permanently to their phones, scrolling through social networks. They want to be able to flick through a digital wardrobe packed with thousands of bodycon dresses, jumpsuits and thigh-high boots while they are at the bus stop, thinking about what they are going to wear on their next night out.
She describes the Boohoo brand, which has a broader clothing offering, as “more inclusive” than its younger, sister brand. “The Pretty Little Thing shopper is sassy, glamorous and body confident,” she says. “I would definitely say she is confident.”
While this wave of digital fashion businesses, which includes rivals such as Missguided and Public Desire, look like overnight success stories, they have generations of experience to draw on as the founders are typically scions of successful clothing importers based in the region. Mahmud Kamani’s father Abdullah, who escaped war-torn Kenya in the 60s to start a new life in England, started out selling handbags on a market stall but went on to become a successful high street clothing supplier. The family reaped £240m from the IPO in 2014.
“Online fashion retailers don’t have the legacy of stores to worry about,” says Boohoo chairman Peter Williams. “If they get traction with customers, as both Boohoo and Pretty Little Thing has done, they can grow very quickly.”
“Being able to source great product at a sensible price has been one of Boohoo’s great strengths,” he adds. “Celebrity trends can be interpreted very quickly and the stock turns [over] at a fantastic rate ... it’s a very dynamic model.”
Missguided is another Manchester-based brand enjoying breakneck growth. In the year to March, its chief executive, Nitin Passi, says sales increased by a third to £117m, and that the business is currently enjoying growth of more than 60%. Profits were down, though, as it invested in a new headquarters in Salford Quays and warehousing, and went on a hiring spree, recruiting 336 head office staff in the last 18 months.
“This enables us to scale the business,” explains Passi. “We are going after growth in the UK and internationally.”
Passi, whose father is a successful clothing supplier, started the site in 2009 when he was in his mid-20s. Rather than describe its model as “fast fashion”, he prefers “rapid fashion”, as 300 lines land on the site every week and it has the ability to get a new design on sale within 10 days. Missguided has recently opened its first store in London with plans to open more around the country in 2017.
He insists the business is not built on his family connections, as their expertise is in dressing a different demographic. “I borrowed £50,000 from my dad in 2009 and paid him back in 2010,” he says. Missguided is based in Manchester mainly because Passi’s uncle offered him free office space at the back of one of his factories to get started.
Missguided has sought to differentiate itself from rivals with edgy branding that includes the promise to “create killer garms for the dreamers, believers and night lovers”.
“A lot of retailers were playing it quite safe so we decided to be a bit more real in the way we spoke to our customers,” says Passi. The 34-year-old entrepreneur agrees competition is hotting up but adds: “In the zero to £20m [sales bracket] there are a lot of players, but above £50m not so many. We focus on the customer, not the competition.”
Manchester’s fashion stars are burning bright at the moment but Williams adds a cautionary note: “The internet means if a brand has momentum it can grow very quickly. Obviously you don’t hear about the ones that don’t make it.”
You’ll have seen the billboards. Usually on the tube or side of a bus, usually featuring diverse models wearing something revealing, sheer and sparkly, and usually with the price writ large on the poster. You might not have bought anything from Boohoo or Missguided or Pretty Little Thing, but that’s because they’re not for you. These brands are for Generation Z. Cheap, disposable, ethically dubious and arbitrarily named, this new wave of online-only retailers mark a shift in how we’re shopping and what we’re buying, and prove that superfast fashion is only getting faster.
Their success comes down a series of tactics. The Missguided site uses terms like “sick” and “fire” alongside expletives and puns that speak to a very specific Snapchatting age-group. It also features Amina Blue, fashion’s current It model (she’s 5’1”, mixed race, and has appeared on the Kanye West’s Yeezy catwalk). Boohoo, meanwhile, has Sofia Richie (daughter of Lionel, famous for being photographed with Justin Bieber) as its campaign star. Both models speak to post-Instagram girls.
Is this merely a triumph of marketing over clothes? Not likely. Shopping has morphed from a high-street industry based on accessibility and affordability to an increasingly online model which encourages risk and whim. These clothes are so cheap you can afford to risk buying them without trying them.
Ever-increasing prices at Topshop have created a gap in the market for cheaper newcomers. This used to be Asos, and arguably still is, but the online retailer that is the largest in the UK has also inspired smaller, cheaper, younger versions in a similar mould. What they do is different to, say, Topshop or Zara, because the clothes are geared towards millennials and Generation Z, and also because they’re less catwalk-led and more inspired by the red carpet.
If we’re buying online it’s because we’re time-poor and we want a quick solution, whether it’s a last-minute party or something deeper and psychological, and these brands fill that hole.
So if there’s no term for the opposite of “investment purchase”, we need to come up with one, because these brands are taking over.
Morwenna Ferrier
What should I wear to my boss’s Christmas party tomorrow night?
Zzzzzip! Record scratch! Sorry to interrupt, folks: normal service will be resumed next week, but this week we celebrate the festive season by going through the best and worst fashion moments of the year. Honestly, it’s what Jesus wanted us to do. He said so, right after he ticked off John the Baptist for his hopelessly passé robe. “Bias cut is soooo BC, John,” he said, as the two of them strolled along the river Jordan. Maybe. I might be less clear on my New Testament than my Vogue.
Let’s start with the downers. Well, it was a strange year. Breasts, for a start, we consigned to the bin. Vogue decreed that cleavage was “over”, and the adoring shots of Elizabeth Debicki’s frequently bra-strap-free back in The Night Manager seemed to confirm this. Rather sweetly, Vogue tried to pretend that theirs was a feminist declaration: “The tits will not be out for the lads. Nor anyone else, for that matter.” How marvellous! No longer will women suffer the tyranny of Eva Herzigova because a whole new body shape will be celebrated. Hurrah for the inclusivity of fashion! Go feminist fashion! Bog off, boobs!
Wait, what’s that noise? I think it might be a giant “EXCEPT” coming down the pipeline. EXCEPT perhaps it is because Vogue lives in an airless world populated only by the underfed and underweight but it seemed, rather sweetly, to have forgotten that not all women need Wonderbras to manage more than a C-cup. Breasts are not, in fact, just some novelty accessory we’ve been dabbling in, like Carrie necklaces or turbans. Going unsupported is not an option for some of us, at least not without giving ourselves two black eyes. So what to do for us, the unlucky few left with unfashionable breasts that can’t simply be slammed away in a drawer? One broadsheet had the answer: “How to dress when you hate your breasts,” read its headline. And that, ladies and gentlemen, is I believe what’s known as coming full circle.
We also hit peak athleisure, with the arrival of Chloé’s £1,000 tracksuit, a joke straight out of Nathan Barley. There was also peak squad, with various female celebrities clamouring on social media to show off their popularity, holidays and fat-free bodies, from Taylor Swift’s overly Instagrammed 4 July party to Cara Delevingne’s hyperbolically Instagrammed Maldives holiday. Confusingly, we also hit peak peak, so it is of utmost importance that someone come up with the 2017 word for something being over (“basic” is definitely over, as, incidentally, is over).
All right, quit your complaining already, woman! What has been good this year? Glad you ask, I reply to myself. Well, by some measure, my favourite fashion(ish) news story of the year was the undoubtedly totally true one about Kate Moss dumping her boyfriend, the great great grandson of Otto von Bismarck, after he switched off the Wi-Fi in Moss’s home during an argument, meaning her teenage daughter couldn’t use Snapchat and Instagram. You can imagine how that went down with a 14-year-old. Try to find one element in that story that doesn’t bring you some modicum of amusement. I know! You literally can’t! Anyway, young Von Bismarck and Moss are back together so not only is this story hilarious, it also has a happy ending. Whether Moss’s daughter feels the return of the Wi-Fi killer is a happy ending, however, is as yet unknown.
Otherwise, the year was really about two labels – Vetements and Gucci. My much-beloved colleague Jess Cartner-Morley wrote about Vetements’ year last week, so indulge me instead in my Gucci obsession. Put it this way: there are two kinds of fashion fans: the cool ones, and the ones who get distracted with funny things such as embroidered leopards and purple shoes. If you are cool, you like Vetements, and if you are more in the latter camp then you are a Gucci person and God bless you and Gucci’s designer, Alessandro Michele, for it. Fashion hasn’t been this fun since Marc Jacobs used to be fun.
The return of the 90s has been quite amusing-slash-traumatic for those of us who remember the 90s very, very clearly. There’s something about seeing a teenager in a slip dress and jumper to make you muse on your youth. And there’s nothing like realising said teenager wasn’t even alive in the 90s to make you realise how long ago the 90s were.
Finally, I’d like to end this retrospective column by bidding a sad farewell to a fashion item I very much hoped would be a part of all of our lives for the next four to eight years. I speak, of course, of Hillary Clinton’s pantsuits. Remember them? One in every colour! So cheering, so dependable. Never mind your politics (although you’re reading the Guardian, so who are we kidding here?), wouldn’t you rather be seeing those pantsuits on the news than that orange face and tonsorial monstrosity? My heart hurts just thinking about those pantsuits, to be honest. So forget about those Hadid sisters: 2016 was about the pantsuit. But not 2017, alas.
Prada, one of the world’s most expensive fashion brands, is making little effort to show that its goods are free of forced labour, according to a new report.
An assessment (pdf) of the quality and transparency of efforts by 20 major apparel companies to safeguard against forced labour from their supply chains, undertaken by KnowTheChain, an accountability initiative, gave Prada a score of nine out of 100.
The Italian luxury brand, which charges hundreds of pounds for its bags and clothing, was one of three companies that scored less than 25 out of 100. The other two were China’s top shoe firm, Belle International Holdings, and Shenzhou International Group Holdings, another Chinese company.
Companies were ranked by KnowTheChain on a range of indicators including auditing processes, worker recruitment and labour rights, using information provided by the brands and data available on public platforms.
Other luxury brands also returned modest scores, including Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss, with 45 and 46 out of 100 respectively. According to KnowTheChain, companies scoring more than 46 are considered to have taken “initial steps” to show awareness and commitment to addressing human trafficking and forced labour in their supply chains.
Some companies that fared badly in the study did so because they failed to provide information about efforts they may be making to safeguard against forced labour.
“It would be hard to fathom a company taking steps to address slavery in its supply chains and then failing or refusing to disclose it publicly,” said Kilian Moote, project director of KnowTheChain. “I think what we can deduce from the rankings is that some companies have a long way to go before they are adequately addressing the risk of the worst forms of labour abuses in the makings of their products.”
Hugo Boss acknowledged that it had supplied KnowTheChain with information but said that, with dialogue ongoing, it preferred not to offer a statement at the present time.
High-street companies scored far more highly in the study than luxury brands. Adidas (81), Gap (77) and H&M (69), all of which have robust systems to check their supply chains for slavery, were among those that received the highest ratings.
All companies fared badly on worker recruitment and rights, with many brands failing to put any practices in place for workers to air grievances or form unions.
The International Labour Organisation considers the apparel industry to be at high risk of forced labour and other forms of slavery. There are an estimated 75 million people working in the global garment sector, three-quarters of whom are women.
Goods produced in exploitative conditions include cotton. The US State Department has estimated that forced labour exists in nine countries producing 65% of the world’s cotton, including China, India and Uzbekistan.
The high levels of public transparency and reporting of anti-slavery initiatives among high-street brands follow years of damaging exposés into labour abuses connected to such companies
The luxury fashion world has come under less scrutiny than “fast-fashion” high-street brands. Prada, Ralph Lauren and Hugo Boss also received low ratings in this year’s fashion transparency index, which used similar indicators to assess how well brands were doing at ensuring their products remain free of labour abuses.
“Two conclusions can be made from low-scoring brands, like Prada. Either they are taking excellent action in secret, or these high-status brands don’t yet have the safeguards in place to reassure their customers, and appear to be falling behind their competitors,” said Phil Bloomer, executive director of the Business & Human Rights Resource Centre.
“Top-ranking brands like Adidas and Gap have listened to workers and activists in their supply chains. Their scores in this ranking show it is commercially viable and ethically imperative to seek to eliminate modern slavery in supply chains.”
Sliding deadlines for safety improvements following the Rana Plaza disaster demonstrate why the Bangladesh government must act (Bangladeshi workers still in danger despite safety pledges, says report, 21 November).
Rana Plaza made the potentially deadly conditions in garment factories impossible to ignore. Safety improvements promoted by retailers have brought some positive changes but, given the scale of the problem in Bangladesh, these cannot tackle the root of the problem on their own, and they are not exclusive to garment factories – so what about other sectors?
Basic safety measures such as fire escapes should be emphasised (and brands need to invest), but if Bangladesh truly wants to help the women who labour in the factories it must think bigger and longer term to find sustainable solutions. Key to this will be diversifying the economy to create better jobs and strengthen workers’ rights so that women have more job options for a better future, and employers compete to attract workers by offering the best conditions.
Farah Kabir
Country director, ActionAid Bangladesh
• Read more Guardian letters – click here to visit gu.com/letters
Austin Reed is returning to the high street seven months after the tailoring specialist collapsed into administration with the loss of 1,000 jobs.
The retail chain’s 120 stores closed in June, but new owner Edinburgh Woollen Mill is investing £100m in a relaunch.
Edinburgh Woollen Mill Group bought the brand when it only had a handful of concessions. It plans to open 50 Austin Reed stores by early 2018, including a London flagship. The brand’s website has relaunched and the first new stores are expected to open before the end of this year.
The Country Casuals and Viyella brands, which the group bought along with Austin Reed, will be relaunched in Edinburgh Woollen Mills stores early next year.
Austin Reed’s customers included Winston Churchill and Elizabeth Taylor in its glory days, but the retail chain struggled for several years before going into administration in April.
While the menswear market is growing faster than womenswear, Austin Reed has faced rising competition from Ted Baker, Reiss, Marks & Spencer and a revived Moss Bros.
The planned store openings were announced as Edinburgh Woollen Mill, which is privately owned by the Cumbria-based entrepreneur Philip Day, reported a 2.4% rise in sales to £576.3m in the year to 27 February. The group, which also owns fashion retailer Peacocks, homeware chain Ponden Mill and golfing brand ProQuip, said pre-tax profits before exceptional items increased by 2.4% to £90.9m. All of the group’s brands had achieved sales growth at established stores, it said.
The company said it planned to open a total of 200 stores by early 2018. In the past year, the group opened 43 stores in the UK and Ireland.
Steve Simpson, the group commercial director of Edinburgh Woollen Mill, said: “By focusing on quality and giving customers exceptional value for money and positive customer service, we have continued to grow despite increased competition.
“With the addition of Austin Reed, which we acquired earlier this year, as well as Country Casuals and Viyella, we aim to continue this organic growth, while always being ready to respond to other opportunities as they arise.”
It would be cruel to describe the front row of a fashion show – where the most senior members of the fashion press are hierarchically seated – as resembling the bar scene in Star Wars, populated by creatures, good and evil, who seem not of this world. But it would be fair to say it’s hard to imagine the majority of them thriving in any other arena than fashion. This has never been the case with Alexandra Shulman, British Vogue’s longest serving editor-in-chief.
I helped to cover fashion shows for the Guardian for a decade and, among her peacock-like colleagues, it was Shulman, as self-contained as a French hen, who intrigued me the most. While she is certainly in the fashion world, she never looks entirely of it, and I always found it easy to imagine her doing something entirely different: writing novels, say, out of her home in north London – which, in fact, she has since done (her second novel was published last year).
The template for a fashion magazine editor has been carved by Shulman’s American counterpart, Anna Wintour, the notoriously fearsome editor of US Vogue. But Shulman has eschewed the kind of celebrity Wintour and other Vogue editors have embraced, and largely ignored the exhausting beauty regimes that are generally seen as part of the job (“I can only stick so far to ‘Il faut souffrir pour être belle’. The less souffrir going on the better, I feel,” she writes in this book.)
But the differences are deeper than mere aesthetics. With fashion journalists, the divide is generally between those who think of themselves as part of the fashion industry and those who think of themselves as journalists. Shulman, despite being at the centre of the fashion world for three decades, has always struck me as being in the latter camp, perhaps because she is the daughter of journalists (her mother is the features writer Drusilla Beyfus and her late father, Milton Shulman, was the Evening Standard’s theatre critic).
Her articles are often far more frank than the cliche of the crushingly controlled fashion editor would lead one to expect. When she interviewed Kate Moss in 2007, she was pleasingly blunt about the model’s, shall we say, changeable nature (“[Moss] makes me feel as welcome as a case of leprosy,” she wrote). When she turned 50, she marked the occasion by writing about how her sense of style has changed over the years – a classic Vogue subject, you might think, although in Shulman’s hands it turned into a reminiscence of how she’s “always had a pretty dodgy figure” and how little interest she has in fashion in her personal wardrobe.
But this is not to suggest that Shulman is any less scary than the more typical fashion editor. I have written for both her and Wintour and, in terms of the fear factor, I’d put them at pretty much level pegging. Whereas Wintour’s froideur verges on the self-parodic, Shulman’s terseness is less easy to dismiss, because she seems more from the realm of normality. I’ve wondered if this was a protective shield she adopted as a high-powered woman working in an industry full of people constantly asking for favours, or simply what she was like. So I was curious to read her somewhat confusingly titled book, Inside Vogue: A Diary of My 100th Year (it is, of course, not Shulman’s 100th year but that of British Vogue). She is a candid writer and I was intrigued to see whether she would apply such candour to herself.
The answer is: yes, she does, as much as she can. This book, structured as a diary, could have just been a bit of easy puffery for Vogue, with Shulman crowing about the magazine’s centenary and its triumphs over the past year (photographing the Duchess of Cambridge, photographing Kate Moss – again!). And there is a fair bit of that. But Shulman has also produced a funny and surprisingly pacy read. She is a wry, subtle writer, and as I was reading it in the evenings I was – and here’s a sentence I never thought I’d write – genuinely looking forward to getting into bed with Shulman every night.
Her anecdotes are all the more amusing for her light touch, especially the ones about celebrities she encounters, all of whom adhere to their own cliche: Charles Saatchi is just as tedious and weird as you’d expect; Naomi Campbell is a high-maintenance nightmare. She is even more cutting about the newspaper columnists who use Vogue as a punchbag without acknowledging that their own publications are just as bad at reducing women to their physical appearance (the Daily Mail’s Liz Jones and Sarah Vine get some especially well-earned jabs). About designers and fashion brands, Shulman is blandly polite, but there’s only so much candour a Vogue editor can afford without scaring the advertisers.
Shulman is most amusing when she writes about herself. She is generally “bad-tempered”, “stressed” and “anxious” – often about work, but also her boiler and Brent Council’s recycling programme (“a system of unbelievable complexity”), two subjects you can’t really imagine Wintour writing about. So next time Shulman barks terrifyingly down the phone at me, I’ll console myself that this has as much to do with north London’s waste disposal processes as it does with my own shortcomings.
Amid the parties with Eddie Redmayne and Kim Kardashian, she interweaves glimpses of the sacrifices she has made to get as far as she has, particularly regarding her son, Sam, and the “wonderful nannies” who looked after him during fashion weeks while Shulman was “crying in the car on the way to the airport”. She hesitates to describe herself as a feminist, preferring instead to say she just gets on with things, and there is something equally old school about the way she writes about Sam and her clearly adored long‑term partner, the journalist David Jenkins. Rarely does she overtly express her love, preferring instead to repeat their frequent jokes at her expense.
She admits that this diary is essentially an Instagram version of her life – “everything we put out about ourselves is edited” – and certain notable subjects are omitted. Most obviously, she never nails why models are so thin, instead merely expressing increasing irritation at being asked about it all the time. But to go into that would require more criticism of fashion designers than even she can allow herself. In the main, this diary has the smack of clear-eyed honesty from a sensible, self-aware woman who works in, and loves, a blithely senseless world.
• Inside Vogue is published by Fig Treet. To order a copy for £13.93 (RRP£16.99) go to bookshop.theguardian.com or call 0330 333 6846. Free UK p&p over £10, online orders only. Phone orders min p&p of £1.99.
Caitlin Robbins always struggled to find clothes for her dad that didn’t make him look and feel frumpy. As someone with ALS, or Lou Gehrig’s disease – which impacts people’s ability to walk, talk, and ultimately, to breathe – her dad wanted comfortable and tailored options. But most of the clothes she could find that didn’t restrict his movement, such as pants with an elastic waist and pullover tops, only made him look awful.
“My father was always particular about fashion; he wanted to look nice and dignified,” says Robbins, a fashion design student. “I wanted to design him outfits to be visually different, functional but still stylish.”
Robbins’s experience points to a seemingly untapped opportunity for apparel makers to serve people with disabilities. One in five American adults, or 53.3 million people, report having disabilities, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Trouble with mobility, cognition and living independently are the three most common types of disabilities.
Finding well-fitting clothes isn’t just about looking good. Research shows that a lack of functional and tailored clothes can make people with disabilities feel excluded during job search or at social events.
So far, the market is mostly served by small companies such as Buck and Buck in Seattle and Silverts, which designs clothes for customers with rheumatoid arthritis, recovering from strokes or in wheelchairs. Nike has also dabbled in this market with a line of sneakers, after getting a request from a 16-year-old boy with cerebral palsy. The shoes use a wraparound zipper rather than shoelaces, and they also come with a larger opening to make it easy to get in and out of. After an online, limited release last fall, Nike has since launched new basketball and running shoes with the same design.
Per consumer request, Land’s End has offered modified swimsuit designs for women with a mastectomy since 1995. The modification includes a raised neckline and armhole of a conventional swimsuit to cover scar tissue or sensitive skin due to radiation. The bra contains a prosthesis pocket and no underwire. Land’s End designers personally meet with breast cancer survivors to help guide the design, according to Michele Casper, vice president public relations at the company.
And, for a while, J Crew also used to stock a green walking cane for those needing additional support.
While the market for this type of specialty clothes is small and difficult to quantify, it’s attracting growing interest, especially in design schools. The Massachusetts Institute of Technology launched Open Style Lab in 2014 to bring together students in design, engineering and occupational therapy to create clothes for people with disabilities. Researchers at MIT’s International Design Center have created fashions to include fewer sensory triggers such as fraying, rough zippers and scratchy tags for children and adults with autism because of their sensitivity to certain textures and colors.
Outside of the US, designers from Brazil to Hong Kong have made it their mission to serve this niche market. Students like Sophie Neff at Nottingham Trent University in the UK have created a knitwear collection for people in wheelchairs. Neff’s designs include putting pockets on thighs rather than the back of the pants for easier access and tight fitting cuffs to prevent the sleeves from getting caught in the wheels.
While these efforts are encouraging, they fall short in serving the market fully, especially in designing apparel that’s chic and injects self-confidence into the wearer, says Luz Pascal, a professor at the Fashion Institute of Technology in New York City. Pascal was the professor who encouraged Robbins, a student at the institute, to channel her desire to design for her dad into a class project. The goal: creating clothes for people with mobility issues, such as veterans who lost a limb at war or those whose illnesses make it challenging for them to open and close buttons.
Amazing designs resulted. Robbins’s creation included a wool blend jacket and pants for her dad with special details such as extra concealed zippers that offer a wider opening to pull on and off and unzip more easily when using the electric patient lifts for the restroom. Her classmate, Elvira Pena, designed a blanket with special panels – with Braille in some cases – to help children with visual impairment or other disabilities to learn things such as shapes and colors.
The students used real-life models for their project, and working with them was an uplifting experience for everyone. “It’s rewarding to see someone smile because you made them look good,” Pascal says.
But making a business case for creating these specialty designs has proven a challenge. Creating affordable clothes requires producing them at scale, which is not often possible when designs have to be customized to accommodate different types of disabilities. For example, one of Pascal’s students fashioned outfits for a veteran who wanted to avoid fabric draping over her missing arm. “It demands greater skill and creativity to address this segment of the population,” Luz says.
Pena recalls the difficulty of finding a manufacturer and sponsor for her learning blanket, which incorporates six detachable panels containing visual, sensory, tactile and other educational activities. Factory representatives told her the panel design was too complex, and that meant Pena had to simplify her product to make it easier to mass produce. “It will require a company that wants to help and create outside-the-box products for smaller markets,” she says.
Orsola de Castro, founder of the nonprofit Fashion Revolution, which wants to make the fashion industry value people, the environment and share profits more equally, hopes the market for people with disabilities will become as viable as the growing segment that touts the use of sustainable and recycled materials.
“For this niche market to grow, big brands will have to be willing to accept lower profits and see values in providing an important service,” de Castro says. “Many doubted sustainable fashion as viable – and look at the growth we’ve seen.”
In July, Kendall Jenner walked across a glass-topped Trevi Fountain in a blue astrakhan coat with full swing skirt. Fendi had hired private jets to fly guests from the couture shows in Paris straight to Rome, where the label had recently invested €2.5m into the fountain’s 18-month rehab. “It will go down,” wrote Nicole Phelps in Vogue, “as one of the most majestic show venues ever.”
Three months later I’m pushing politely through thousands of American tourists to see the renovated fountain for myself. People lean in with waterproof selfie sticks, queuing for a chance to grin beside the gleaming horses. Visitors throw in almost €3,000 a day. During its renovation, the water was drained from the fountain, but a small basin was set up so tourists wouldn’t miss out on any potential luck.
“The city is part of our creative heritage,” said Silvia Venturini Fendi, third-generation member of the family fashion house. “It’s like an open-air museum where inspiration can come from anywhere.” Fendi is not the only fashion house investing in Italy’s monuments: Bulgari has donated €1.5m to restore the Spanish Steps, and Tod’s, of loafer fame, has put up €25m to repair the Colosseum.
It seems apt that this city, its story so tightly wound with ideas of luxury and taste, can be propped up by fashion brands in a way that, say, London can’t. The idea of Topshop sponsoring a clean-up of Nelson’s Column is almost unthinkable.
It’s a short walk from the Fountain to the Steps, the air warm and thick with the smell of candied peanuts and drains. On the way, I meet a woman briskly directing her young daughter through the dawdling tourists. Marta has lived in Rome all her life, and watched the renovations with some suspicion. “Oh, they’re beautiful,” she says, “but they’re not for us.”
